README.md, before:

# Raspberry-ili9340spi
ILI9340 SPI TFT Library for Raspberry Pi.   
This may works with other boards like OrangePi/NanoPi.   

You can show a chart to ILI9340/ILI9341/ILI9163C/ST7735 SPI TFT.   
You can choose bmc2835 library/WiringPi library.   

I tested these TFT.   
1.44 inch 128x128 ST7735   
1.44 inch 128x128 ILI9163C   
1.8 inch 128x160 ST7735   
2.2 inch 240x320 ILI9340   
2.4 inch 240x320 ILI9341   
2.4 inch 240x320 ILI9341   

---

# Wirering   

|TFT||Rpi/Opi||
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|VCC|--|3.3V||
|GND|--|GND||
|CS|--|Pin#24(SPI CS0)|*2|
|RES|--|Pin#5|*1|
|D/C|--|Pin#3|*1|
|MOSI|--|Pin#19(SPI MOSI)||
|SCK|--|Pin#23(SPI SCLK)||
|LED|--|3.3V||
|MISO|--|N/C||

(*1) You can change it to any pin by changing here.   
```
#define D_C  2  // GPIO2=Pin#3
#define RES  3  // GPIO3=Pin#5
```

(*2) You can use CS1 by specifying -DSPI1.   

---

# Build using bcm2835 library   
RPi Only, Very fast   

```
wget http://www.airspayce.com/mikem/bcm2835/bcm2835-1.56.tar.gz
tar zxvf bcm2835-1.56.tar.gz
cd bcm2835-1.56
./configure
make
sudo make check
sudo make install
```

__\* This tool require 1.56 or later.__   
__\* Because this tool uses bcm2835_spi_write.__   


### Using SPI0
```
cd $HOME   
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lbcm2835 -lm -DBCM
sudo ./demo
```

### Using SPI1
```
cd $HOME   
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lbcm2835 -lm -DBCM -DSPI1
sudo ./demo
```

---

# Build using WiringPi library   
WiringPi library initializes GPIO in one of the following ways:
- int wiringPiSetup (void);   
- int wiringPiSetupGpio (void);   
- int wiringPiSetupPhys (void);   
- int wiringPiSetupSys (void);   

This project uses the ```wiringPiSetupGpio()``` function to initialize GPIOs.   
Then use the wiringPiSPISetup() function to initialize the SPI.   
If you use it on a board other than the RPI board, you may need to change the GPIO number.   
```
#define D_C  2  // GPIO2=Pin#3
#define RES  3  // GPIO3=Pin#5
#define C_S  8  // GPIO8=Pin#24
```

As far as I know, there are these WiringPi libraries.   
- WiringPi for OrangePi   
- WiringPi for BananaPi   
- WiringPi for NanoPi   
- WiringPi for Pine-64   

### Using SPI0
```
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lwiringPi -lm -pthread -DWPI
sudo ./demo
```

### Using SPI1
```
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lwiringPi -lm -pthread -DWPI -DSPI1
sudo ./demo
```

___Note for OrangePi___   
Opi have only 1 SPI.   
OPi-PC has SPI0 on pin 24.   
OPi-ZERO has SPI1 on pin 24.   

---

# TFT resolution and GRAM offset   
TFT resolution is set to tft.conf.   

If your TFT doesn't use a memory from 0th address in GRAM,
It use GRAM offset which set to tft.conf.   

----

![ili9340-11](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363270-668e0880-7edc-11e9-8f5a-ad00c60c5d4d.JPG)
![ili9340-12](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363271-668e0880-7edc-11e9-80f9-4019c53c334d.JPG)
![ili9340-13](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363272-668e0880-7edc-11e9-8ced-64367179c509.JPG)
![ili9340-14](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363273-668e0880-7edc-11e9-84c1-779bd70a9ac4.JPG)
![ili9340-15](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363274-67269f00-7edc-11e9-874e-b96165374809.JPG)
![ili9340-16](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363275-67269f00-7edc-11e9-9664-2e7a2fe6d6bf.JPG)
![ili9340-17](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363276-67269f00-7edc-11e9-9fc4-579a03e6bfd2.JPG)
![ili9340-18](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363277-67269f00-7edc-11e9-9d77-2ebacc8666c5.JPG)
![ili9340-19](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363278-67bf3580-7edc-11e9-9e95-c9daaa85c4b1.JPG)
![ili9340-20](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363268-65f57200-7edc-11e9-8cc8-af25397d5e24.JPG)
![ili9340-21](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363269-65f57200-7edc-11e9-89f9-8ad644e0b279.JPG)

---

This library can use ILI9341 TFT.   

From left 2.8" ILI9341,2.4" ILI9341, 2.2" ILI9340.   

![ili9341-a](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25058072/db0b0de2-21b0-11e7-8fe1-8dc0496c3fed.JPG)

![ili9341-b](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25058088/f733f38a-21b0-11e7-9c71-b861f7da0c19.JPG)

![ili9341-c](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25058093/02f7680a-21b1-11e7-8f7c-578e6127ca7e.JPG)

---

This library can use ILI9163C/ST7735 TFT.   

From left to right.   
2.2 inch 240x320 ILI9340   
1.44 inch 128x128 ST7735   
1.44 inch 128x128 ILI9163C   
1.8 inch 128x160 ST7735   

![ili9163-1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/28749424-d9c5af2e-7501-11e7-9e3c-a88376ac015f.JPG)

---

# XPT2046 Touch Screen   
There is a TFT equipped with XPT2046.   
![XPT2046-3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/144333924-5236bff3-3f4d-4be4-8e99-b6e31878e4f3.jpg)

A library of XPT2046 Touch Screen is included in this library.   
I ported from [here](https://github.com/xofc/xpt2uinput).

There is a TFT equipped with HR2046.   
XPT2046 and HR2046 are very similar. But HR2046 does not work properly.   
![XPT2046-2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/144332571-717f33b1-df03-4a0a-9a23-c7c99b9d4d32.JPG)

Wirering   

|TFT||Rpi||
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|T_IRQ|--|Pin#22|(*1)|
|T_OUT|--|Pin#21(SPI MISO)|(*2)|
|T_DIN|--|Pin#19(SPI MOSI)|(*2)|
|T_CS|--|Pin#26(SPI CE1)||
|T_CLK|--|Pin#23(SPI SCLK)|(*2)|
|MISO|--|N/C||
|LED|--|3.3V||
|SCK|--|Pin#23(SPI SCLK)|(*2)|
|MOSI|--|Pin#19(SPI MOSI)|(*2)|
|D/C|--|Pin#3|(*1)|
|RES|--|Pin#5|(*1)|
|CS|--|Pin#24(SPI CS0)||
|GND|--|GND||
|VCC|--|3.3V||

(*1) You can change any pin.   

(*2) SPI is shared by TFT and XPT2046.   

---

```
cc -o xpt xpt.c xpt2046.c -lbcm2835   
sudo ./xpt
```

If you touch screen, point will show.   

![touch-11](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25060732/9b4ccd2e-21df-11e7-9f08-0b7377a07f10.jpg)

---
```
cc -o touch touch.c fontx.c ili9340.c xpt2046.c -lbcm2835 -lm -DBCM
sudo ./touch
```

If you touch area, number will show.   

![touch-12](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25060736/af89c170-21df-11e7-9789-1705e81e4692.JPG)

Commit message:

Added compile flag for SPI bus speed

README.md, after:

# Raspberry-ili9340spi
ILI9340 SPI TFT Library for Raspberry Pi.   
This may works with other boards like OrangePi/NanoPi.   

You can show a chart to ILI9340/ILI9341/ILI9163C/ST7735 SPI TFT.   
You can choose bmc2835 library/WiringPi library.   

I tested these TFT.   
1.44 inch 128x128 ST7735   
1.44 inch 128x128 ILI9163C   
1.8 inch 128x160 ST7735   
2.2 inch 240x320 ILI9340   
2.4 inch 240x320 ILI9341   
2.4 inch 240x320 ILI9341   

---

# Wirering   

|TFT||Rpi/Opi||
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|VCC|--|3.3V||
|GND|--|GND||
|CS|--|Pin#24(SPI CS0)|*2|
|RES|--|Pin#5|*1|
|D/C|--|Pin#3|*1|
|MOSI|--|Pin#19(SPI MOSI)||
|SCK|--|Pin#23(SPI SCLK)||
|LED|--|3.3V||
|MISO|--|N/C||

(*1) You can change it to any pin by changing here.   
```
#define D_C  2  // GPIO2=Pin#3
#define RES  3  // GPIO3=Pin#5
```

(*2) You can use CS1 by specifying -DSPI1.   

---

# Build using bcm2835 library   
RPi Only, Very fast   

```
wget http://www.airspayce.com/mikem/bcm2835/bcm2835-1.56.tar.gz
tar zxvf bcm2835-1.56.tar.gz
cd bcm2835-1.56
./configure
make
sudo make check
sudo make install
```

__\* This tool require 1.56 or later.__   
__\* Because this tool uses bcm2835_spi_write.__   


### Using SPI0
```
cd $HOME   
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lbcm2835 -lm -DBCM
sudo ./demo
```

### Using SPI1
```
cd $HOME   
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lbcm2835 -lm -DBCM -DSPI1
sudo ./demo
```

---

# SPI bus speed for bcm2835   
By default it uses 7.8125MHz on Rpi2, 12.5MHz on RPI3.   
Can be changed at compile time.   
- -DSPI_SPEED16 : 15.625MHz on Rpi2, 25MHz on RPI3.   
- -DSPI_SPEED32 : 31.25MHz on Rpi2, 50MHz on RPI3.   

___50MHz is an overclock.___   

---

# SPI bus speed for WiringPi   
By default it uses 8MHz on all Rpi.   
Can be changed at compile time.   
- -DSPI_SPEED16 : 16MHz on all Rpi.   
- -DSPI_SPEED32 : 32MHz on all Rpi.   

---

# Build using WiringPi library   
WiringPi library initializes GPIO in one of the following ways:
- int wiringPiSetup (void);   
- int wiringPiSetupGpio (void);   
- int wiringPiSetupPhys (void);   
- int wiringPiSetupSys (void);   

This project uses the ```wiringPiSetupGpio()``` function to initialize GPIOs.   
Then use the wiringPiSPISetup() function to initialize the SPI.   
If you use it on a board other than the RPI board, you may need to change the GPIO number.   
```
#define D_C  2  // GPIO2=Pin#3
#define RES  3  // GPIO3=Pin#5
#define C_S  8  // GPIO8=Pin#24
```

As far as I know, there are these WiringPi libraries.   
- WiringPi for OrangePi   
- WiringPi for BananaPi   
- WiringPi for NanoPi   
- WiringPi for Pine-64   

### Using SPI0
```
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lwiringPi -lm -pthread -DWPI
sudo ./demo
```

### Using SPI1
```
git clone https://github.com/nopnop2002/Raspberry-ili9340spi
cd Raspberry-ili9340spi
cc -o demo demo.c fontx.c ili9340.c -lwiringPi -lm -pthread -DWPI -DSPI1
sudo ./demo
```

___Note for OrangePi___   
Opi have only 1 SPI.   
OPi-PC has SPI0 on pin 24.   
OPi-ZERO has SPI1 on pin 24.   

---

# TFT resolution and GRAM offset   
TFT resolution is set to tft.conf.   

If your TFT doesn't use a memory from 0th address in GRAM,
It use GRAM offset which set to tft.conf.   

----

![ili9340-11](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363270-668e0880-7edc-11e9-8f5a-ad00c60c5d4d.JPG)
![ili9340-12](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363271-668e0880-7edc-11e9-80f9-4019c53c334d.JPG)
![ili9340-13](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363272-668e0880-7edc-11e9-8ced-64367179c509.JPG)
![ili9340-14](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363273-668e0880-7edc-11e9-84c1-779bd70a9ac4.JPG)
![ili9340-15](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363274-67269f00-7edc-11e9-874e-b96165374809.JPG)
![ili9340-16](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363275-67269f00-7edc-11e9-9664-2e7a2fe6d6bf.JPG)
![ili9340-17](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363276-67269f00-7edc-11e9-9fc4-579a03e6bfd2.JPG)
![ili9340-18](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363277-67269f00-7edc-11e9-9d77-2ebacc8666c5.JPG)
![ili9340-19](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363278-67bf3580-7edc-11e9-9e95-c9daaa85c4b1.JPG)
![ili9340-20](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363268-65f57200-7edc-11e9-8cc8-af25397d5e24.JPG)
![ili9340-21](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/58363269-65f57200-7edc-11e9-89f9-8ad644e0b279.JPG)

---

This library can use ILI9341 TFT.   

From left 2.8" ILI9341,2.4" ILI9341, 2.2" ILI9340.   

![ili9341-a](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25058072/db0b0de2-21b0-11e7-8fe1-8dc0496c3fed.JPG)

![ili9341-b](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25058088/f733f38a-21b0-11e7-9c71-b861f7da0c19.JPG)

![ili9341-c](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25058093/02f7680a-21b1-11e7-8f7c-578e6127ca7e.JPG)

---

This library can use ILI9163C/ST7735 TFT.   

From left to right.   
2.2 inch 240x320 ILI9340   
1.44 inch 128x128 ST7735   
1.44 inch 128x128 ILI9163C   
1.8 inch 128x160 ST7735   

![ili9163-1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/28749424-d9c5af2e-7501-11e7-9e3c-a88376ac015f.JPG)

---

# XPT2046 Touch Screen   
There is a TFT equipped with XPT2046.   
![XPT2046-3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/144333924-5236bff3-3f4d-4be4-8e99-b6e31878e4f3.jpg)

A library of XPT2046 Touch Screen is included in this library.   
I ported from [here](https://github.com/xofc/xpt2uinput).

There is a TFT equipped with HR2046.   
XPT2046 and HR2046 are very similar. But HR2046 does not work properly.   
![XPT2046-2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6020549/144332571-717f33b1-df03-4a0a-9a23-c7c99b9d4d32.JPG)

Wirering   

|TFT||Rpi||
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|T_IRQ|--|Pin#22|(*1)|
|T_OUT|--|Pin#21(SPI MISO)|(*2)|
|T_DIN|--|Pin#19(SPI MOSI)|(*2)|
|T_CS|--|Pin#26(SPI CE1)||
|T_CLK|--|Pin#23(SPI SCLK)|(*2)|
|MISO|--|N/C||
|LED|--|3.3V||
|SCK|--|Pin#23(SPI SCLK)|(*2)|
|MOSI|--|Pin#19(SPI MOSI)|(*2)|
|D/C|--|Pin#3|(*1)|
|RES|--|Pin#5|(*1)|
|CS|--|Pin#24(SPI CS0)||
|GND|--|GND||
|VCC|--|3.3V||

(*1) You can change any pin.   

(*2) SPI is shared by TFT and XPT2046.   

---

```
cc -o xpt xpt.c xpt2046.c -lbcm2835   
sudo ./xpt
```

If you touch screen, point will show.   

![touch-11](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25060732/9b4ccd2e-21df-11e7-9f08-0b7377a07f10.jpg)

---
```
cc -o touch touch.c fontx.c ili9340.c xpt2046.c -lbcm2835 -lm -DBCM
sudo ./touch
```

If you touch area, number will show.   

![touch-12](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/6020549/25060736/af89c170-21df-11e7-9789-1705e81e4692.JPG)
